---
title: 'II Chronicles'
template: bible
simplesearch:
    process: false
---

# II Chronicles

### THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES

## CHAPTER 1.

And Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom, and the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> his God _was_ with him, and magnified him exceedingly.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>Then Solomon spake unto all Israel, to the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every governor in all Israel, the chief of the fathers.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>So Solomon, and all the congregation with him, went to the high place that _was_ at Gibeon; for there was the tabernacle of the congregation of God, which Moses the servant of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> had made in the wilderness.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>But the ark of God had David brought up from Kirjath–jearim to _the place which_ David had prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>Moreover the brasen altar, that Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, had made, he put before the tabernacle of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>: and Solomon and the congregation sought unto it.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And Solomon went up thither to the brasen altar before the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, which _was_ at the tabernacle of the congregation, and offered a thousand burnt offerings upon it.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>¶ In that night did God appear unto Solomon, and said unto him, Ask what I shall give thee.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>And Solomon said unto God, Thou hast shewed great mercy unto David my father, and hast made me to reign in his stead.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>Now, O <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God, let thy promise unto David my father be established: for thou hast made me king over a people like the dust of the earth in multitude.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people: for who can judge this thy people, _that is so_ great?  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>And God said to Solomon, Because this was in thine heart, and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of thine enemies, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked wisdom and knowledge for thyself, that thou mayest judge my people, over whom I have made thee king:  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>Wisdom and knowledge _is_ granted unto thee; and I will give thee riches, and wealth, and honour, such as none of the kings have had that _have been_ before thee, neither shall there any after thee have the like.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>¶ Then Solomon came _from his journey_ to the high place that _was_ at Gibeon to Jerusalem, from before the tabernacle of the congregation, and reigned over Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen: and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, which he placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And the king made silver and gold at Jerusalem _as plenteous_ as stones, and cedar trees made he as the sycomore trees that _are_ in the vale for abundance.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the king’s merchants received the linen yarn at a price.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>And they fetched up, and brought forth out of Egypt a chariot for six hundred _shekels_ of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty: and so brought they out _horses_ for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, by their means.  

## CHAPTER 2.

And Solomon determined to build an house for the name of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and an house for his kingdom.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And Solomon told out threescore and ten thousand men to bear burdens, and fourscore thousand to hew in the mountain, and three thousand and six hundred to oversee them.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>¶ And Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre, saying, As thou didst deal with David my father, and didst send him cedars to build him an house to dwell therein, _even so deal with me_.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>Behold, I build an house to the name of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> my God, to dedicate _it_ to him, _and_ to burn before him sweet incense, and for the continual shewbread, and for the burnt offerings morning and evening, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feasts of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> our God. This _is an ordinance_ for ever to Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And the house which I build _is_ great: for great _is_ our God above all gods.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>But who is able to build him an house, seeing the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain him? who _am_ I then, that I should build him an house, save only to burn sacrifice before him?  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>Send me now therefore a man cunning to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, and in iron, and in purple, and crimson, and blue, and that can skill to grave with the cunning men that _are_ with me in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom David my father did provide.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>Send me also cedar trees, fir trees, and algum trees, out of Lebanon: for I know that thy servants can skill to cut timber in Lebanon; and, behold, my servants _shall be_ with thy servants,  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>Even to prepare me timber in abundance: for the house which I am about to build _shall be_ wonderful great.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And, behold, I will give to thy servants, the hewers that cut timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and twenty thousand measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty thousand baths of oil.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>¶ Then Huram the king of Tyre answered in writing, which he sent to Solomon, Because the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> hath loved his people, he hath made thee king over them.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>Huram said moreover, Blessed _be_ the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel, that made heaven and earth, who hath given to David the king a wise son, endued with prudence and understanding, that might build an house for the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and an house for his kingdom.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And now I have sent a cunning man, endued with understanding, of Huram my father’s,  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>The son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father _was_ a man of Tyre, skilful to work in gold, and in silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson; also to grave any manner of graving, and to find out every device which shall be put to him, with thy cunning men, and with the cunning men of my lord David thy father.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>Now therefore the wheat, and the barley, the oil, and the wine, which my lord hath spoken of, let him send unto his servants:  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as much as thou shalt need: and we will bring it to thee in floats by sea to Joppa; and thou shalt carry it up to Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>¶ And Solomon numbered all the strangers that _were_ in the land of Israel, after the numbering wherewith David his father had numbered them; and they were found an hundred and fifty thousand and three thousand and six hundred.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>And he set threescore and ten thousand of them _to be_ bearers of burdens, and fourscore thousand _to be_ hewers in the mountain, and three thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people a work.  

## CHAPTER 3.

Then Solomon began to build the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> at Jerusalem in mount Moriah, where _the Lord_ appeared unto David his father, in the place that David had prepared in the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And he began to build in the second _day_ of the second month, in the fourth year of his reign.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>¶ Now these _are the things wherein_ Solomon was instructed for the building of the house of God. The length by cubits after the first measure _was_ threescore cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And the porch that _was_ in the front _of the house_, the length _of it was_ according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the height _was_ an hundred and twenty: and he overlaid it within with pure gold.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And the greater house he cieled with fir tree, which he overlaid with fine gold, and set thereon palm trees and chains.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty: and the gold _was_ gold of Parvaim.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>He overlaid also the house, the beams, the posts, and the walls thereof, and the doors thereof, with gold; and graved cherubims on the walls.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>And he made the most holy house, the length whereof _was_ according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits: and he overlaid it with fine gold, _amounting_ to six hundred talents.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>And the weight of the nails _was_ fifty shekels of gold. And he overlaid the upper chambers with gold.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>¶ And in the most holy house he made two cherubims of image work, and overlaid them with gold.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>¶ And the wings of the cherubims _were_ twenty cubits long: one wing _of the one cherub was_ five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house: and the other wing _was likewise_ five cubits, reaching to the wing of the other cherub.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And _one_ wing of the other cherub _was_ five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house: and the other wing _was_ five cubits _also_, joining to the wing of the other cherub.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>The wings of these cherubims spread themselves forth twenty cubits: and they stood on their feet, and their faces _were_ inward.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>¶ And he made the vail _of_ blue, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen, and wrought cherubims thereon.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>Also he made before the house two pillars of thirty and five cubits high, and the chapiter that _was_ on the top of each of them _was_ five cubits.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And he made chains, _as_ in the oracle, and put _them_ on the heads of the pillars; and made an hundred pomegranates, and put _them_ on the chains.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>And he reared up the pillars before the temple, one on the right hand, and the other on the left; and called the name of that on the right hand Jachin, and the name of that on the left Boaz.  

## CHAPTER 4.

Moreover he made an altar of brass, twenty cubits the length thereof, and twenty cubits the breadth thereof, and ten cubits the height thereof.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>¶ Also he made a molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, and five cubits the height thereof; and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And under it _was_ the similitude of oxen, which did compass it round about: ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round about. Two rows of oxen _were_ cast, when it was cast.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east: and the sea _was set_ above upon them, and all their hinder parts _were_ inward.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And the thickness of it _was_ an handbreadth, and the brim of it like the work of the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies; _and_ it received and held three thousand baths.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>¶ He made also ten lavers, and put five on the right hand, and five on the left, to wash in them: such things as they offered for the burnt offering they washed in them; but the sea _was_ for the priests to wash in.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And he made ten candlesticks of gold according to their form, and set _them_ in the temple, five on the right hand, and five on the left.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>He made also ten tables, and placed _them_ in the temple, five on the right side, and five on the left. And he made an hundred basons of gold.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>¶ Furthermore he made the court of the priests, and the great court, and doors for the court, and overlaid the doors of them with brass.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And he set the sea on the right side of the east end, over against the south.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>¶ And Huram made the pots, and the shovels, and the basons. And Huram finished the work that he was to make for king Solomon for the house of God;  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>_To wit_, the two pillars, and the pommels, and the chapiters _which were_ on the top of the two pillars, and the two wreaths to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which _were_ on the top of the pillars;  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And four hundred pomegranates on the two wreaths; two rows of pomegranates on each wreath, to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which _were_ upon the pillars.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>He made also bases, and lavers made he upon the bases;  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>One sea, and twelve oxen under it.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>The pots also, and the shovels, and the fleshhooks, and all their instruments, did Huram his father make to king Solomon for the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> of bright brass.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zeredathah.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>Thus Solomon made all these vessels in great abundance: for the weight of the brass could not be found out.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>¶ And Solomon made all the vessels that _were for_ the house of God, the golden altar also, and the tables whereon the shewbread _was set_;  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>Moreover the candlesticks with their lamps, that they should burn after the manner before the oracle, of pure gold;  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>And the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, _made he of_ gold, _and_ that perfect gold;  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>And the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censers, _of_ pure gold: and the entry of the house, the inner doors thereof for the most holy _place_, and the doors of the house of the temple, _were of_ gold.  

## CHAPTER 5.

Thus all the work that Solomon made for the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> was finished: and Solomon brought in _all_ the things that David his father had dedicated; and the silver, and the gold, and all the instruments, put he among the treasures of the house of God.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>¶ Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> out of the city of David, which _is_ Zion.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>Wherefore all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto the king in the feast which _was_ in the seventh month.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And all the elders of Israel came; and the Levites took up the ark.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And they brought up the ark, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and all the holy vessels that _were_ in the tabernacle, these did the priests _and_ the Levites bring up.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>Also king Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel that were assembled unto him before the ark, sacrificed sheep and oxen, which could not be told nor numbered for multitude.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> unto his place, to the oracle of the house, into the most holy _place, even_ under the wings of the cherubims:  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>For the cherubims spread forth _their_ wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof above.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>And they drew out the staves _of the ark_, that the ends of the staves were seen from the ark before the oracle; but they were not seen without. And there it is unto this day.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>_There was_ nothing in the ark save the two tables which Moses put _therein_ at Horeb, when the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> made _a covenant_ with the children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy _place_: (for all the priests _that were_ present were sanctified, _and_ did not _then_ wait by course:  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>Also the Levites _which were_ the singers, all of them of Asaph, of Heman, of Jeduthun, with their sons and their brethren, _being_ arrayed in white linen, having cymbals and psalteries and harps, stood at the east end of the altar, and with them an hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets:)  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>It came even to pass, as the trumpeters and singers _were_ as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>; and when they lifted up _their_ voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of musick, and praised the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, _saying_, For _he is_ good; for his mercy _endureth_ for ever: that _then_ the house was filled with a cloud, _even_ the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>;  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>So that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud: for the glory of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> had filled the house of God.  

## CHAPTER 6.

Then said Solomon, The <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> hath said that he would dwell in the thick darkness.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>But I have built an house of habitation for thee, and a place for thy dwelling for ever.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And the king turned his face, and blessed the whole congregation of Israel: and all the congregation of Israel stood.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And he said, Blessed _be_ the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel, who hath with his hands fulfilled _that_ which he spake with his mouth to my father David, saying,  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>Since the day that I brought forth my people out of the land of Egypt I chose no city among all the tribes of Israel to build an house in, that my name might be there; neither chose I any man to be a ruler over my people Israel:  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>But I have chosen Jerusalem, that my name might be there; and have chosen David to be over my people Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>Now it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for the name of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>But the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> said to David my father, Forasmuch as it was in thine heart to build an house for my name, thou didst well in that it was in thine heart:  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>Notwithstanding thou shalt not build the house; but thy son which shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house for my name.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>The <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> therefore hath performed his word that he hath spoken: for I am risen up in the room of David my father, and am set on the throne of Israel, as the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> promised, and have built the house for the name of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>And in it have I put the ark, wherein _is_ the covenant of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, that he made with the children of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>¶ And he stood before the altar of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands:  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>For Solomon had made a brasen scaffold, of five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and three cubits high, and had set it in the midst of the court: and upon it he stood, and kneeled down upon his knees before all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven,  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And said, O <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel, _there is_ no God like thee in the heaven, nor in the earth; which keepest covenant, and _shewest_ mercy unto thy servants, that walk before thee with all their hearts:  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>Thou which hast kept with thy servant David my father that which thou hast promised him; and spakest with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled _it_ with thine hand, as _it is_ this day.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>Now therefore, O <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my father that which thou hast promised him, saying, There shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit upon the throne of Israel; yet so that thy children take heed to their way to walk in my law, as thou hast walked before me.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>Now then, O <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel, let thy word be verified, which thou hast spoken unto thy servant David.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>But will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth? behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house which I have built!  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>Have respect therefore to the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, O <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> my God, to hearken unto the cry and the prayer which thy servant prayeth before thee:  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>That thine eyes may be open upon this house day and night, upon the place whereof thou hast said that thou wouldest put thy name there; to hearken unto the prayer which thy servant prayeth toward this place.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>Hearken therefore unto the supplications of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, which they shall make toward this place: hear thou from thy dwelling place, _even_ from heaven; and when thou hearest, forgive.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>¶ If a man sin against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him to make him swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this house;  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>Then hear thou from heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, by requiting the wicked, by recompensing his way upon his own head; and by justifying the righteous, by giving him according to his righteousness.  
<span class="verse-number">24&ensp;</span>¶ And if thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemy, because they have sinned against thee; and shall return and confess thy name, and pray and make supplication before thee in this house;  
<span class="verse-number">25&ensp;</span>Then hear thou from the heavens, and forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest to them and to their fathers.  
<span class="verse-number">26&ensp;</span>¶ When the heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have sinned against thee; _yet_ if they pray toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou dost afflict them;  
<span class="verse-number">27&ensp;</span>Then hear thou from heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, when thou hast taught them the good way, wherein they should walk; and send rain upon thy land, which thou hast given unto thy people for an inheritance.  
<span class="verse-number">28&ensp;</span>¶ If there be dearth in the land, if there be pestilence, if there be blasting, or mildew, locusts, or caterpillers; if their enemies besiege them in the cities of their land; whatsoever sore or whatsoever sickness _there be_:  
<span class="verse-number">29&ensp;</span>_Then_ what prayer _or_ what supplication soever shall be made of any man, or of all thy people Israel, when every one shall know his own sore and his own grief, and shall spread forth his hands in this house:  
<span class="verse-number">30&ensp;</span>Then hear thou from heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and render unto every man according unto all his ways, whose heart thou knowest; (for thou only knowest the hearts of the children of men:)  
<span class="verse-number">31&ensp;</span>That they may fear thee, to walk in thy ways, so long as they live in the land which thou gavest unto our fathers.  
<span class="verse-number">32&ensp;</span>¶ Moreover concerning the stranger, which is not of thy people Israel, but is come from a far country for thy great name’s sake, and thy mighty hand, and thy stretched out arm; if they come and pray in this house;  
<span class="verse-number">33&ensp;</span>Then hear thou from the heavens, _even_ from thy dwelling place, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to thee for; that all people of the earth may know thy name, and fear thee, as _doth_ thy people Israel, and may know that this house which I have built is called by thy name.  
<span class="verse-number">34&ensp;</span>If thy people go out to war against their enemies by the way that thou shalt send them, and they pray unto thee toward this city which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name;  
<span class="verse-number">35&ensp;</span>Then hear thou from the heavens their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause.  
<span class="verse-number">36&ensp;</span>If they sin against thee, (for _there is_ no man which sinneth not,) and thou be angry with them, and deliver them over before _their_ enemies, and they carry them away captives unto a land far off or near;  
<span class="verse-number">37&ensp;</span>Yet _if_ they bethink themselves in the land whither they are carried captive, and turn and pray unto thee in the land of their captivity, saying, We have sinned, we have done amiss, and have dealt wickedly;  
<span class="verse-number">38&ensp;</span>If they return to thee with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their captivity, whither they have carried them captives, and pray toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, and _toward_ the city which thou hast chosen, and toward the house which I have built for thy name:  
<span class="verse-number">39&ensp;</span>Then hear thou from the heavens, _even_ from thy dwelling place, their prayer and their supplications, and maintain their cause, and forgive thy people which have sinned against thee.  
<span class="verse-number">40&ensp;</span>Now, my God, let, I beseech thee, thine eyes be open, and _let_ thine ears _be_ attent unto the prayer _that is made_ in this place.  
<span class="verse-number">41&ensp;</span>Now therefore arise, O <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God, into thy resting place, thou, and the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, O <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God, be clothed with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness.  
<span class="verse-number">42&ensp;</span>O <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God, turn not away the face of thine anointed: remember the mercies of David thy servant.  

## CHAPTER 7.

Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and the glory of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> filled the house.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And the priests could not enter into the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, because the glory of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> had filled the <span class="small-caps">Lord’s</span> house.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And when all the children of Israel saw how the fire came down, and the glory of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> upon the house, they bowed themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped, and praised the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, _saying_, For _he is_ good; for his mercy _endureth_ for ever.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>¶ Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And king Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty and two thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep: so the king and all the people dedicated the house of God.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And the priests waited on their offices: the Levites also with instruments of musick of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, which David the king had made to praise the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, because his mercy _endureth_ for ever, when David praised by their ministry; and the priests sounded trumpets before them, and all Israel stood.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>Moreover Solomon hallowed the middle of the court that _was_ before the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>: for there he offered burnt offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings, because the brasen altar which Solomon had made was not able to receive the burnt offerings, and the meat offerings, and the fat.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>¶ Also at the same time Solomon kept the feast seven days, and all Israel with him, a very great congregation, from the entering in of Hamath unto the river of Egypt.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>And in the eighth day they made a solemn assembly: for they kept the dedication of the altar seven days, and the feast seven days.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent the people away into their tents, glad and merry in heart for the goodness that the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> had shewed unto David, and to Solomon, and to Israel his people.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>Thus Solomon finished the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and the king’s house: and all that came into Solomon’s heart to make in the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and in his own house, he prosperously effected.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>¶ And the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> appeared to Solomon by night, and said unto him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place to myself for an house of sacrifice.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if I command the locusts to devour the land, or if I send pestilence among my people;  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>If my people, which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>Now mine eyes shall be open, and mine ears attent unto the prayer _that is made_ in this place.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>For now have I chosen and sanctified this house, that my name may be there for ever: and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>And as for thee, if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father walked, and do according to all that I have commanded thee, and shalt observe my statutes and my judgments;  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>Then will I stablish the throne of thy kingdom, according as I have covenanted with David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man _to be_ ruler in Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>But if ye turn away, and forsake my statutes and my commandments, which I have set before you, and shall go and serve other gods, and worship them;  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>Then will I pluck them up by the roots out of my land which I have given them; and this house, which I have sanctified for my name, will I cast out of my sight, and will make it _to be_ a proverb and a byword among all nations.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>And this house, which is high, shall be an astonishment to every one that passeth by it; so that he shall say, Why hath the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> done thus unto this land, and unto this house?  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>And it shall be answered, Because they forsook the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of their fathers, which brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other gods, and worshipped them, and served them: therefore hath he brought all this evil upon them.  

## CHAPTER 8.

And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, wherein Solomon had built the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and his own house,  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>That the cities which Huram had restored to Solomon, Solomon built them, and caused the children of Israel to dwell there.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And Solomon went to Hamath–zobah, and prevailed against it.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And he built Tadmor in the wilderness, and all the store cities, which he built in Hamath.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>Also he built Beth–horon the upper, and Beth–horon the nether, fenced cities, with walls, gates, and bars;  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And Baalath, and all the store cities that Solomon had, and all the chariot cities, and the cities of the horsemen, and all that Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and throughout all the land of his dominion.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>¶ _As for_ all the people _that were_ left of the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which _were_ not of Israel,  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>_But_ of their children, who were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel consumed not, them did Solomon make to pay tribute until this day.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no servants for his work; but they _were_ men of war, and chief of his captains, and captains of his chariots and horsemen.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And these _were_ the chief of king Solomon’s officers, _even_ two hundred and fifty, that bare rule over the people.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>¶ And Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of David unto the house that he had built for her: for he said, My wife shall not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, because _the places are_ holy, whereunto the ark of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> hath come.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>¶ Then Solomon offered burnt offerings unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> on the altar of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, which he had built before the porch,  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>Even after a certain rate every day, offering according to the commandment of Moses, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feasts, three times in the year, _even_ in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>¶ And he appointed, according to the order of David his father, the courses of the priests to their service, and the Levites to their charges, to praise and minister before the priests, as the duty of every day required: the porters also by their courses at every gate: for so had David the man of God commanded.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And they departed not from the commandment of the king unto the priests and Levites concerning any matter, or concerning the treasures.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>Now all the work of Solomon was prepared unto the day of the foundation of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and until it was finished. _So_ the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> was perfected.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>¶ Then went Solomon to Ezion–geber, and to Eloth, at the sea side in the land of Edom.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>And Huram sent him by the hands of his servants ships, and servants that had knowledge of the sea; and they went with the servants of Solomon to Ophir, and took thence four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and brought _them_ to king Solomon.  

## CHAPTER 9.

And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to prove Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem, with a very great company, and camels that bare spices, and gold in abundance, and precious stones: and when she was come to Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her heart.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And Solomon told her all her questions: and there was nothing hid from Solomon which he told her not.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built,  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel; his cupbearers also, and their apparel; and his ascent by which he went up into the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>; there was no more spirit in her.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And she said to the king, _It was_ a true report which I heard in mine own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom:  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>Howbeit I believed not their words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen _it_: and, behold, the one half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not told me: _for_ thou exceedest the fame that I heard.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>Happy _are_ thy men, and happy _are_ these thy servants, which stand continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>Blessed be the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> thy God, which delighted in thee to set thee on his throne, _to be_ king for the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> thy God: because thy God loved Israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made he thee king over them, to do judgment and justice.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices great abundance, and precious stones: neither was there any such spice as the queen of Sheba gave king Solomon.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And the servants also of Huram, and the servants of Solomon, which brought gold from Ophir, brought algum trees and precious stones.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>And the king made _of_ the algum trees terraces to the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and to the king’s palace, and harps and psalteries for singers: and there were none such seen before in the land of Judah.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatsoever she asked, beside _that_ which she had brought unto the king. So she turned, and went away to her own land, she and her servants.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>¶ Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred and threescore and six talents of gold;  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>Beside _that which_ chapmen and merchants brought. And all the kings of Arabia and governors of the country brought gold and silver to Solomon.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>¶ And king Solomon made two hundred targets _of_ beaten gold: six hundred _shekels_ of beaten gold went to one target.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And three hundred shields _made he of_ beaten gold: three hundred _shekels_ of gold went to one shield. And the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with pure gold.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>And _there were_ six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold, _which were_ fastened to the throne, and stays on each side of the sitting place, and two lions standing by the stays:  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps. There was not the like made in any kingdom.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>¶ And all the drinking vessels of king Solomon _were of_ gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon _were of_ pure gold: none _were of_ silver; it was _not_ any thing accounted of in the days of Solomon.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>For the king’s ships went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram: every three years once came the ships of Tarshish bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>And king Solomon passed all the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom.  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>¶ And all the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, that God had put in his heart.  
<span class="verse-number">24&ensp;</span>And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment, harness, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year.  
<span class="verse-number">25&ensp;</span>¶ And Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen; whom he bestowed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">26&ensp;</span>¶ And he reigned over all the kings from the river even unto the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt.  
<span class="verse-number">27&ensp;</span>And the king made silver in Jerusalem as stones, and cedar trees made he as the sycomore trees that _are_ in the low plains in abundance.  
<span class="verse-number">28&ensp;</span>And they brought unto Solomon horses out of Egypt, and out of all lands.  
<span class="verse-number">29&ensp;</span>¶ Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, _are_ they not written in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of Iddo the seer against Jeroboam the son of Nebat?  
<span class="verse-number">30&ensp;</span>And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years.  
<span class="verse-number">31&ensp;</span>And Solomon slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the city of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.  

## CHAPTER 10.

And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for to Shechem were all Israel come to make him king.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who _was_ in Egypt, whither he had fled from the presence of Solomon the king, heard _it_, that Jeroboam returned out of Egypt.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And they sent and called him. So Jeroboam and all Israel came and spake to Rehoboam, saying,  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>Thy father made our yoke grievous: now therefore ease thou somewhat the grievous servitude of thy father, and his heavy yoke that he put upon us, and we will serve thee.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And he said unto them, Come again unto me after three days. And the people departed.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>¶ And king Rehoboam took counsel with the old men that had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, What counsel give ye _me_ to return answer to this people?  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And they spake unto him, saying, If thou be kind to this people, and please them, and speak good words to them, they will be thy servants for ever.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>But he forsook the counsel which the old men gave him, and took counsel with the young men that were brought up with him, that stood before him.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>And he said unto them, What advice give ye that we may return answer to this people, which have spoken to me, saying, Ease somewhat the yoke that thy father did put upon us?  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And the young men that were brought up with him spake unto him, saying, Thus shalt thou answer the people that spake unto thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou _it_ somewhat lighter for us; thus shalt thou say unto them, My little _finger_ shall be thicker than my father’s loins.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>For whereas my father put a heavy yoke upon you, I will put more to your yoke: my father chastised you with whips, but I _will chastise you_ with scorpions.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>¶ So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam on the third day, as the king bade, saying, Come again to me on the third day.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And the king answered them roughly; and king Rehoboam forsook the counsel of the old men,  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And answered them after the advice of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add thereto: my father chastised you with whips, but I _will chastise you_ with scorpions.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>So the king hearkened not unto the people: for the cause was of God, that the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> might perform his word, which he spake by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>¶ And when all Israel _saw_ that the king would not hearken unto them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David? and _we have_ none inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to your tents, O Israel: _and_ now, David, see to thine own house. So all Israel went to their tents.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>But _as for_ the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>Then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram that _was_ over the tribute; and the children of Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. But king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to _his_ chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>And Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.  

## CHAPTER 11.

And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he gathered of the house of Judah and Benjamin an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen _men_, which were warriors, to fight against Israel, that he might bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>But the word of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying,  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>Speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying,  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>Thus saith the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren: return every man to his house: for this thing is done of me. And they obeyed the words of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and returned from going against Jeroboam.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>¶ And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built cities for defence in Judah.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>He built even Beth–lehem, and Etam, and Tekoa,  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And Beth–zur, and Shoco, and Adullam,  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>And Gath, and Mareshah, and Ziph,  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>And Adoraim, and Lachish, and Azekah,  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And Zorah, and Aijalon, and Hebron, which _are_ in Judah and in Benjamin fenced cities.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>And he fortified the strong holds, and put captains in them, and store of victual, and of oil and wine.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And in every several city _he put_ shields and spears, and made them exceeding strong, having Judah and Benjamin on his side.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>¶ And the priests and the Levites that _were_ in all Israel resorted to him out of all their coasts.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>For the Levites left their suburbs and their possession, and came to Judah and Jerusalem: for Jeroboam and his sons had cast them off from executing the priest’s office unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>:  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And he ordained him priests for the high places, and for the devils, and for the calves which he had made.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And after them out of all the tribes of Israel such as set their hearts to seek the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel came to Jerusalem, to sacrifice unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of their fathers.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam the son of Solomon strong, three years: for three years they walked in the way of David and Solomon.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>¶ And Rehoboam took him Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the son of David to wife, _and_ Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse;  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>Which bare him children; Jeush, and Shamariah, and Zaham.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>And after her he took Maachah the daughter of Absalom; which bare him Abijah, and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>And Rehoboam loved Maachah the daughter of Absalom above all his wives and his concubines: (for he took eighteen wives, and threescore concubines; and begat twenty and eight sons, and threescore daughters.)  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>And Rehoboam made Abijah the son of Maachah the chief, _to be_ ruler among his brethren: for _he thought_ to make him king.  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>And he dealt wisely, and dispersed of all his children throughout all the countries of Judah and Benjamin, unto every fenced city: and he gave them victual in abundance. And he desired many wives.  

## CHAPTER 12.

And it came to pass, when Rehoboam had established the kingdom, and had strengthened himself, he forsook the law of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and all Israel with him.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And it came to pass, _that_ in the fifth year of king Rehoboam Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had transgressed against the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>,  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>With twelve hundred chariots, and threescore thousand horsemen: and the people _were_ without number that came with him out of Egypt; the Lubims, the Sukkiims, and the Ethiopians.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And he took the fenced cities which _pertained_ to Judah, and came to Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>¶ Then came Shemaiah the prophet to Rehoboam, and _to_ the princes of Judah, that were gathered together to Jerusalem because of Shishak, and said unto them, Thus saith the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, Ye have forsaken me, and therefore have I also left you in the hand of Shishak.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>Whereupon the princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves; and they said, The <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> _is_ righteous.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And when the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> saw that they humbled themselves, the word of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> came to Shemaiah, saying, They have humbled themselves; _therefore_ I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some deliverance; and my wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>Nevertheless they shall be his servants; that they may know my service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took away the treasures of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and the treasures of the king’s house; he took all: he carried away also the shields of gold which Solomon had made.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>Instead of which king Rehoboam made shields of brass, and committed _them_ to the hands of the chief of the guard, that kept the entrance of the king’s house.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>And when the king entered into the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, the guard came and fetched them, and brought them again into the guard chamber.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And when he humbled himself, the wrath of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> turned from him, that he would not destroy _him_ altogether: and also in Judah things went well.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>¶ So king Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem, and reigned: for Rehoboam _was_ one and forty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his mother’s name _was_ Naamah an Ammonitess.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And he did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, _are_ they not written in the book of Shemaiah the prophet, and of Iddo the seer concerning genealogies? And _there were_ wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David: and Abijah his son reigned in his stead.  

## CHAPTER 13.

Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam began Abijah to reign over Judah.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>He reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also _was_ Michaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And Abijah set the battle in array with an army of valiant men of war, _even_ four hundred thousand chosen men: Jeroboam also set the battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men, _being_ mighty men of valour.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>¶ And Abijah stood up upon mount Zemaraim, which _is_ in mount Ephraim, and said, Hear me, thou Jeroboam, and all Israel;  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>Ought ye not to know that the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel gave the kingdom over Israel to David for ever, _even_ to him and to his sons by a covenant of salt?  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the son of David, is risen up, and hath rebelled against his lord.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And there are gathered unto him vain men, the children of Belial, and have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand them.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> in the hand of the sons of David; and ye _be_ a great multitude, and _there are_ with you golden calves, which Jeroboam made you for gods.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>Have ye not cast out the priests of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you priests after the manner of the nations of _other_ lands? so that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself with a young bullock and seven rams, _the same_ may be a priest of _them that are_ no gods.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>But as for us, the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> _is_ our God, and we have not forsaken him; and the priests, which minister unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, _are_ the sons of Aaron, and the Levites _wait_ upon _their_ business:  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>And they burn unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> every morning and every evening burnt sacrifices and sweet incense: the shewbread also _set they in order_ upon the pure table; and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof, to burn every evening: for we keep the charge of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> our God; but ye have forsaken him.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And, behold, God himself _is_ with us for _our_ captain, and his priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. O children of Israel, fight ye not against the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of your fathers; for ye shall not prosper.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>¶ But Jeroboam caused an ambushment to come about behind them: so they were before Judah, and the ambushment _was_ behind them.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And when Judah looked back, behold, the battle _was_ before and behind: and they cried unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and the priests sounded with the trumpets.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>Then the men of Judah gave a shout: and as the men of Judah shouted, it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And the children of Israel fled before Judah: and God delivered them into their hand.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>And Abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter: so there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time, and the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of their fathers.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him, Beth–el with the towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns thereof, and Ephrain with the towns thereof.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah: and the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> struck him, and he died.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>¶ But Abijah waxed mighty, and married fourteen wives, and begat twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his sayings, _are_ written in the story of the prophet Iddo.  

## CHAPTER 14.

So Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead. In his days the land was quiet ten years.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And Asa did _that which was_ good and right in the eyes of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> his God:  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>For he took away the altars of the strange _gods_, and the high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves:  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And commanded Judah to seek the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of their fathers, and to do the law and the commandment.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places and the images: and the kingdom was quiet before him.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>¶ And he built fenced cities in Judah: for the land had rest, and he had no war in those years; because the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> had given him rest.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>Therefore he said unto Judah, Let us build these cities, and make about _them_ walls, and towers, gates, and bars, _while_ the land _is_ yet before us; because we have sought the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> our God, we have sought _him_, and he hath given us rest on every side. So they built and prospered.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>And Asa had an army _of men_ that bare targets and spears, out of Judah three hundred thousand; and out of Benjamin, that bare shields and drew bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand: all these _were_ mighty men of valour.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>¶ And there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian with an host of a thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots; and came unto Mareshah.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>Then Asa went out against him, and they set the battle in array in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>And Asa cried unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> his God, and said, <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, _it is_ nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power: help us, O <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> our God; for we rest on thee, and in thy name we go against this multitude. O <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, thou _art_ our God; let not man prevail against thee.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>So the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah; and the Ethiopians fled.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And Asa and the people that _were_ with him pursued them unto Gerar: and the Ethiopians were overthrown, that they could not recover themselves; for they were destroyed before the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and before his host; and they carried away very much spoil.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And they smote all the cities round about Gerar; for the fear of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> came upon them: and they spoiled all the cities; for there was exceeding much spoil in them.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>They smote also the tents of cattle, and carried away sheep and camels in abundance, and returned to Jerusalem.  

## CHAPTER 15.

And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded:  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him, Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin; The <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> _is_ with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>Now for a long season Israel _hath been_ without the true God, and without a teaching priest, and without law.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>But when they in their trouble did turn unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel, and sought him, he was found of them.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And in those times _there was_ no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations _were_ upon all the inhabitants of the countries.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And nation was destroyed of nation, and city of city: for God did vex them with all adversity.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak: for your work shall be rewarded.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>¶ And when Asa heard these words, and the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he took courage, and put away the abominable idols out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities which he had taken from mount Ephraim, and renewed the altar of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, that _was_ before the porch of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon: for they fell to him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> his God _was_ with him.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>And they offered unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> the same time, of the spoil _which_ they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And they entered into a covenant to seek the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of their fathers with all their heart and with all their soul;  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>That whosoever would not seek the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel should be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And they sware unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And all Judah rejoiced at the oath: for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him with their whole desire; and he was found of them: and the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> gave them rest round about.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>¶ And also _concerning_ Maachah the mother of Asa the king, he removed her from _being_ queen, because she had made an idol in a grove: and Asa cut down her idol, and stamped _it_, and burnt _it_ at the brook Kidron.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>But the high places were not taken away out of Israel: nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>¶ And he brought into the house of God the things that his father had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold, and vessels.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>And there was no _more_ war unto the five and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa.  

## CHAPTER 16.

In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa Baasha king of Israel came up against Judah, and built Ramah, to the intent that he might let none go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> and of the king’s house, and sent to Ben–hadad king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying,  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>_There is_ a league between me and thee, as _there was_ between my father and thy father: behold, I have sent thee silver and gold; go, break thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And Ben–hadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel; and they smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abel–maim, and all the store cities of Naphtali.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And it came to pass, when Baasha heard _it_, that he left off building of Ramah, and let his work cease.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>Then Asa the king took all Judah; and they carried away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha was building; and he built therewith Geba and Mizpah.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>¶ And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah, and said unto him, Because thou hast relied on the king of Syria, and not relied on the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Syria escaped out of thine hand.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very many chariots and horsemen? yet, because thou didst rely on the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, he delivered them into thine hand.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>For the eyes of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of _them_ whose heart _is_ perfect toward him. Herein thou hast done foolishly: therefore from henceforth thou shalt have wars.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>Then Asa was wroth with the seer, and put him in a prison house; for _he was_ in a rage with him because of this _thing_. And Asa oppressed _some_ of the people the same time.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>¶ And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, lo, they _are_ written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And Asa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign was diseased in his feet, until his disease _was_ exceeding _great_: yet in his disease he sought not to the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, but to the physicians.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>¶ And Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the one and fortieth year of his reign.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And they buried him in his own sepulchres, which he had made for himself in the city of David, and laid him in the bed which was filled with sweet odours and divers kinds _of spices_ prepared by the apothecaries’ art: and they made a very great burning for him.  

## CHAPTER 17.

And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened himself against Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And he placed forces in all the fenced cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his father David, and sought not unto Baalim;  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>But sought to the _Lord_ God of his father, and walked in his commandments, and not after the doings of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>Therefore the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> stablished the kingdom in his hand; and all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat presents; and he had riches and honour in abundance.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>: moreover he took away the high places and groves out of Judah.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>¶ Also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes, _even_ to Ben–hail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah, and to Nethaneel, and to Michaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>And with them _he sent_ Levites, _even_ Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tob–adonijah, Levites; and with them Elishama and Jehoram, priests.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>And they taught in Judah, and _had_ the book of the law of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> with them, and went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and taught the people.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>¶ And the fear of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that _were_ round about Judah, so that they made no war against Jehoshaphat.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>Also _some_ of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents, and tribute silver; and the Arabians brought him flocks, seven thousand and seven hundred rams, and seven thousand and seven hundred he goats.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>¶ And Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly; and he built in Judah castles, and cities of store.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And he had much business in the cities of Judah: and the men of war, mighty men of valour, _were_ in Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And these _are_ the numbers of them according to the house of their fathers: Of Judah, the captains of thousands; Adnah the chief, and with him mighty men of valour three hundred thousand.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And next to him _was_ Jehohanan the captain, and with him two hundred and fourscore thousand.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And next him _was_ Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly offered himself unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>; and with him two hundred thousand mighty men of valour.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>And of Benjamin; Eliada a mighty man of valour, and with him armed men with bow and shield two hundred thousand.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>And next him _was_ Jehozabad, and with him an hundred and fourscore thousand ready prepared for the war.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>These waited on the king, beside _those_ whom the king put in the fenced cities throughout all Judah.  

## CHAPTER 18.

Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honour in abundance, and joined affinity with Ahab.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And after _certain_ years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance, and for the people that _he had_ with him, and persuaded him to go up _with him_ to Ramoth–gilead.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And Ahab king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Wilt thou go with me to Ramoth–gilead? And he answered him, I _am_ as thou _art_, and my people as thy people; and _we will be_ with thee in the war.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>¶ And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thee, at the word of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> to day.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>Therefore the king of Israel gathered together of prophets four hundred men, and said unto them, Shall we go to Ramoth–gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for God will deliver _it_ into the king’s hand.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>But Jehoshaphat said, _Is there_ not here a prophet of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> besides, that we might enquire of him?  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, _There is_ yet one man, by whom we may enquire of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>: but I hate him; for he never prophesied good unto me, but always evil: the same _is_ Micaiah the son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>And the king of Israel called for one _of his_ officers, and said, Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah sat either of them on his throne, clothed in _their_ robes, and they sat in a void place at the entering in of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets prophesied before them.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah had made him horns of iron, and said, Thus saith the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, With these thou shalt push Syria until they be consumed.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramoth–gilead, and prosper: for the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> shall deliver _it_ into the hand of the king.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And the messenger that went to call Micaiah spake to him, saying, Behold, the words of the prophets _declare_ good to the king with one assent; let thy word therefore, I pray thee, be like one of theirs, and speak thou good.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And Micaiah said, _As_ the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> liveth, even what my God saith, that will I speak.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And when he was come to the king, the king said unto him, Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth–gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And he said, Go ye up, and prosper, and they shall be delivered into your hand.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And the king said to him, How many times shall I adjure thee that thou say nothing but the truth to me in the name of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>?  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>Then he said, I did see all Israel scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd: and the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> said, These have no master; let them return _therefore_ every man to his house in peace.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee _that_ he would not prophesy good unto me, but evil?  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>Again he said, Therefore hear the word of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>; I saw the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> sitting upon his throne, and all the host of heaven standing on his right hand and _on_ his left.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>And the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> said, Who shall entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth–gilead? And one spake saying after this manner, and another saying after that manner.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>Then there came out a spirit, and stood before the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and said, I will entice him. And the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> said unto him, Wherewith?  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>And he said, I will go out, and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And _the Lord_ said, Thou shalt entice _him_, and thou shalt also prevail: go out, and do _even_ so.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>Now therefore, behold, the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of these thy prophets, and the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> hath spoken evil against thee.  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near, and smote Micaiah upon the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> from me to speak unto thee?  
<span class="verse-number">24&ensp;</span>And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see on that day when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.  
<span class="verse-number">25&ensp;</span>Then the king of Israel said, Take ye Micaiah, and carry him back to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king’s son;  
<span class="verse-number">26&ensp;</span>And say, Thus saith the king, Put this _fellow_ in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I return in peace.  
<span class="verse-number">27&ensp;</span>And Micaiah said, If thou certainly return in peace, _then_ hath not the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, all ye people.  
<span class="verse-number">28&ensp;</span>¶ So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramoth–gilead.  
<span class="verse-number">29&ensp;</span>And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself, and will go to the battle; but put thou on thy robes. So the king of Israel disguised himself; and they went to the battle.  
<span class="verse-number">30&ensp;</span>Now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of the chariots that _were_ with him, saying, Fight ye not with small or great, save only with the king of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">31&ensp;</span>And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, It _is_ the king of Israel. Therefore they compassed about him to fight: but Jehoshaphat cried out, and the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> helped him; and God moved them _to depart_ from him.  
<span class="verse-number">32&ensp;</span>For it came to pass, that, when the captains of the chariots perceived that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back again from pursuing him.  
<span class="verse-number">33&ensp;</span>And a _certain_ man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints of the harness: therefore he said to his chariot man, Turn thine hand, that thou mayest carry me out of the host; for I am wounded.  
<span class="verse-number">34&ensp;</span>And the battle increased that day: howbeit the king of Israel stayed _himself_ up in _his_ chariot against the Syrians until the even: and about the time of the sun going down he died.  

## CHAPTER 19.

And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him, and said to king Jehoshaphat, Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>? therefore _is_ wrath upon thee from before the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>Nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou hast taken away the groves out of the land, and hast prepared thine heart to seek God.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem: and he went out again through the people from Beer–sheba to mount Ephraim, and brought them back unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of their fathers.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>¶ And he set judges in the land throughout all the fenced cities of Judah, city by city,  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And said to the judges, Take heed what ye do: for ye judge not for man, but for the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, who _is_ with you in the judgment.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>Wherefore now let the fear of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> be upon you; take heed and do _it_: for _there is_ no iniquity with the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>¶ Moreover in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and _of_ the priests, and of the chief of the fathers of Israel, for the judgment of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and for controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>And he charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, faithfully, and with a perfect heart.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And what cause soever shall come to you of your brethren that dwell in their cities, between blood and blood, between law and commandment, statutes and judgments, ye shall even warn them that they trespass not against the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and _so_ wrath come upon you, and upon your brethren: this do, and ye shall not trespass.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>And, behold, Amariah the chief priest _is_ over you in all matters of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of Judah, for all the king’s matters: also the Levites _shall be_ officers before you. Deal courageously, and the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> shall be with the good.  

## CHAPTER 20.

It came to pass after this also, _that_ the children of Moab, and the children of Ammon, and with them _other_ beside the Ammonites, came against Jehoshaphat to battle.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>Then there came some that told Jehoshaphat, saying, There cometh a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea on this side Syria; and, behold, they _be_ in Hazazon–tamar, which _is_ En–gedi.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And Judah gathered themselves together, to ask _help_ of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>: even out of all the cities of Judah they came to seek the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>¶ And Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, before the new court,  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And said, O <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of our fathers, _art_ not thou God in heaven? and rulest _not_ thou over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand _is there not_ power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee?  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>_Art_ not thou our God, _who_ didst drive out the inhabitants of this land before thy people Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham thy friend for ever?  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>And they dwelt therein, and have built thee a sanctuary therein for thy name, saying,  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>If, _when_ evil cometh upon us, _as_ the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this house, and in thy presence, (for thy name _is_ in this house,) and cry unto thee in our affliction, then thou wilt hear and help.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And now, behold, the children of Ammon and Moab and mount Seir, whom thou wouldest not let Israel invade, when they came out of the land of Egypt, but they turned from them, and destroyed them not;  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>Behold, _I say, how_ they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy possession, which thou hast given us to inherit.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>O our God, wilt thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great company that cometh against us; neither know we what to do: but our eyes _are_ upon thee.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And all Judah stood before the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, with their little ones, their wives, and their children.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>¶ Then upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, a Levite of the sons of Asaph, came the Spirit of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> in the midst of the congregation;  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and thou king Jehoshaphat, Thus saith the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> unto you, Be not afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for the battle _is_ not yours, but God’s.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>To morrow go ye down against them: behold, they come up by the cliff of Ziz; and ye shall find them at the end of the brook, before the wilderness of Jeruel.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>Ye shall not _need_ to fight in this _battle_: set yourselves, stand ye _still_, and see the salvation of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> with you, O Judah and Jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against them: for the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> _will be_ with you.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>And Jehoshaphat bowed his head with _his_ face to the ground: and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell before the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, worshipping the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>And the Levites, of the children of the Kohathites, and of the children of the Korhites, stood up to praise the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel with a loud voice on high.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>¶ And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the wilderness of Tekoa: and as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stood and said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem; Believe in the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> your God, so shall ye be established; believe his prophets, so shall ye prosper.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>And when he had consulted with the people, he appointed singers unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and that should praise the beauty of holiness, as they went out before the army, and to say, Praise the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>; for his mercy _endureth_ for ever.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>¶ And when they began to sing and to praise, the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> set ambushments against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, which were come against Judah; and they were smitten.  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>For the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy _them_: and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another.  
<span class="verse-number">24&ensp;</span>And when Judah came toward the watch tower in the wilderness, they looked unto the multitude, and, behold, they _were_ dead bodies fallen to the earth, and none escaped.  
<span class="verse-number">25&ensp;</span>And when Jehoshaphat and his people came to take away the spoil of them, they found among them in abundance both riches with the dead bodies, and precious jewels, which they stripped off for themselves, more than they could carry away: and they were three days in gathering of the spoil, it was so much.  
<span class="verse-number">26&ensp;</span>¶ And on the fourth day they assembled themselves in the valley of Berachah; for there they blessed the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>: therefore the name of the same place was called, The valley of Berachah, unto this day.  
<span class="verse-number">27&ensp;</span>Then they returned, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, and Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to Jerusalem with joy; for the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> had made them to rejoice over their enemies.  
<span class="verse-number">28&ensp;</span>And they came to Jerusalem with psalteries and harps and trumpets unto the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">29&ensp;</span>And the fear of God was on all the kingdoms of _those_ countries, when they had heard that the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> fought against the enemies of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">30&ensp;</span>So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet: for his God gave him rest round about.  
<span class="verse-number">31&ensp;</span>¶ And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah: _he was_ thirty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name _was_ Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.  
<span class="verse-number">32&ensp;</span>And he walked in the way of Asa his father, and departed not from it, doing _that which was_ right in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">33&ensp;</span>Howbeit the high places were not taken away: for as yet the people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their fathers.  
<span class="verse-number">34&ensp;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold, they _are_ written in the book of Jehu the son of Hanani, who _is_ mentioned in the book of the kings of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">35&ensp;</span>¶ And after this did Jehoshaphat king of Judah join himself with Ahaziah king of Israel, who did very wickedly:  
<span class="verse-number">36&ensp;</span>And he joined himself with him to make ships to go to Tarshish: and they made the ships in Ezion–geber.  
<span class="verse-number">37&ensp;</span>Then Eliezer the son of Dodavah of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou hast joined thyself with Ahaziah, the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> hath broken thy works. And the ships were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish.  

## CHAPTER 21.

Now Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And Jehoram his son reigned in his stead.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And he had brethren the sons of Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Jehiel, and Zechariah, and Azariah, and Michael, and Shephatiah: all these _were_ the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And their father gave them great gifts of silver, and of gold, and of precious things, with fenced cities in Judah: but the kingdom gave he to Jehoram; because he _was_ the firstborn.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>Now when Jehoram was risen up to the kingdom of his father, he strengthened himself, and slew all his brethren with the sword, and _divers_ also of the princes of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>¶ Jehoram _was_ thirty and two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, like as did the house of Ahab: for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife: and he wrought _that which was_ evil in the eyes of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>Howbeit the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> would not destroy the house of David, because of the covenant that he had made with David, and as he promised to give a light to him and to his sons for ever.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>¶ In his days the Edomites revolted from under the dominion of Judah, and made themselves a king.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>Then Jehoram went forth with his princes, and all his chariots with him: and he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites which compassed him in, and the captains of the chariots.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>So the Edomites revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day. The same time _also_ did Libnah revolt from under his hand; because he had forsaken the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of his fathers.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah, and caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication, and compelled Judah _thereto_.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>¶ And there came a writing to him from Elijah the prophet, saying, Thus saith the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of David thy father, Because thou hast not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah,  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>But hast walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and hast made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring, like to the whoredoms of the house of Ahab, and also hast slain thy brethren of thy father’s house, _which were_ better than thyself:  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>Behold, with a great plague will the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> smite thy people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy goods:  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And thou _shalt have_ great sickness by disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels fall out by reason of the sickness day by day.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>¶ Moreover the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines, and of the Arabians, that _were_ near the Ethiopians:  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>And they came up into Judah, and brake into it, and carried away all the substance that was found in the king’s house, and his sons also, and his wives; so that there was never a son left him, save Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>¶ And after all this the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> smote him in his bowels with an incurable disease.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>And it came to pass, that in process of time, after the end of two years, his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness: so he died of sore diseases. And his people made no burning for him, like the burning of his fathers.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years, and departed without being desired. Howbeit they buried him in the city of David, but not in the sepulchres of the kings.  

## CHAPTER 22.

And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son king in his stead: for the band of men that came with the Arabians to the camp had slain all the eldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah reigned.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>Forty and two years old _was_ Ahaziah when he began to reign, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also _was_ Athaliah the daughter of Omri.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab: for his mother was his counsellor to do wickedly.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>Wherefore he did evil in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> like the house of Ahab: for they were his counsellors after the death of his father to his destruction.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>¶ He walked also after their counsel, and went with Jehoram the son of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Syria at Ramoth–gilead: and the Syrians smote Joram.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And he returned to be healed in Jezreel because of the wounds which were given him at Ramah, when he fought with Hazael king of Syria. And Azariah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Jehoram the son of Ahab at Jezreel, because he was sick.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And the destruction of Ahaziah was of God by coming to Joram: for when he was come, he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the son of Nimshi, whom the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> had anointed to cut off the house of Ahab.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>And it came to pass, that, when Jehu was executing judgment upon the house of Ahab, and found the princes of Judah, and the sons of the brethren of Ahaziah, that ministered to Ahaziah, he slew them.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>And he sought Ahaziah: and they caught him, (for he was hid in Samaria,) and brought him to Jehu: and when they had slain him, they buried him: Because, said they, he _is_ the son of Jehoshaphat, who sought the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> with all his heart. So the house of Ahaziah had no power to keep still the kingdom.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>¶ But when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the seed royal of the house of Judah.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king’s sons that were slain, and put him and his nurse in a bedchamber. So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of king Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the priest, (for she was the sister of Ahaziah,) hid him from Athaliah, so that she slew him not.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And he was with them hid in the house of God six years: and Athaliah reigned over the land.  

## CHAPTER 23.

And in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself, and took the captains of hundreds, Azariah the son of Jeroham, and Ishmael the son of Jehohanan, and Azariah the son of Obed, and Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into covenant with him.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And they went about in Judah, and gathered the Levites out of all the cities of Judah, and the chief of the fathers of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And all the congregation made a covenant with the king in the house of God. And he said unto them, Behold, the king’s son shall reign, as the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> hath said of the sons of David.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>This _is_ the thing that ye shall do; A third part of you entering on the sabbath, of the priests and of the Levites, _shall be_ porters of the doors;  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And a third part _shall be_ at the king’s house; and a third part at the gate of the foundation: and all the people _shall be_ in the courts of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>But let none come into the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, save the priests, and they that minister of the Levites; they shall go in, for they _are_ holy: but all the people shall keep the watch of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And the Levites shall compass the king round about, every man with his weapons in his hand; and whosoever _else_ cometh into the house, he shall be put to death: but be ye with the king when he cometh in, and when he goeth out.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>So the Levites and all Judah did according to all things that Jehoiada the priest had commanded, and took every man his men that were to come in on the sabbath, with them that were to go _out_ on the sabbath: for Jehoiada the priest dismissed not the courses.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>Moreover Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of hundreds spears, and bucklers, and shields, that _had been_ king David’s, which _were_ in the house of God.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And he set all the people, every man having his weapon in his hand, from the right side of the temple to the left side of the temple, along by the altar and the temple, by the king round about.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>Then they brought out the king’s son, and put upon him the crown, and _gave him_ the testimony, and made him king. And Jehoiada and his sons anointed him, and said, God save the king.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>¶ Now when Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and praising the king, she came to the people into the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>:  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And she looked, and, behold, the king stood at his pillar at the entering in, and the princes and the trumpets by the king: and all the people of the land rejoiced, and sounded with trumpets, also the singers with instruments of musick, and such as taught to sing praise. Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and said, Treason, Treason.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>Then Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds that were set over the host, and said unto them, Have her forth of the ranges: and whoso followeth her, let him be slain with the sword. For the priest said, Slay her not in the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>So they laid hands on her; and when she was come to the entering of the horse gate by the king’s house, they slew her there.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>¶ And Jehoiada made a covenant between him, and between all the people, and between the king, that they should be the <span class="small-caps">Lord’s</span> people.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>Then all the people went to the house of Baal, and brake it down, and brake his altars and his images in pieces, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>Also Jehoiada appointed the offices of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> by the hand of the priests the Levites, whom David had distributed in the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, to offer the burnt offerings of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, as _it is_ written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing, _as it was ordained_ by David.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>And he set the porters at the gates of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, that none _which was_ unclean in any thing should enter in.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>And he took the captains of hundreds, and the nobles, and the governors of the people, and all the people of the land, and brought down the king from the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>: and they came through the high gate into the king’s house, and set the king upon the throne of the kingdom.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>And all the people of the land rejoiced: and the city was quiet, after that they had slain Athaliah with the sword.  

## CHAPTER 24.

Joash _was_ seven years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also _was_ Zibiah of Beer–sheba.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And Joash did _that which was_ right in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> all the days of Jehoiada the priest.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And Jehoiada took for him two wives; and he begat sons and daughters.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>¶ And it came to pass after this, _that_ Joash was minded to repair the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And he gathered together the priests and the Levites, and said to them, Go out unto the cities of Judah, and gather of all Israel money to repair the house of your God from year to year, and see that ye hasten the matter. Howbeit the Levites hastened _it_ not.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And the king called for Jehoiada the chief, and said unto him, Why hast thou not required of the Levites to bring in out of Judah and out of Jerusalem the collection, _according to the commandment_ of Moses the servant of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and of the congregation of Israel, for the tabernacle of witness?  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken up the house of God; and also all the dedicated things of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> did they bestow upon Baalim.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>And at the king’s commandment they made a chest, and set it without at the gate of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>And they made a proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in to the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> the collection _that_ Moses the servant of God _laid_ upon Israel in the wilderness.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And all the princes and all the people rejoiced, and brought in, and cast into the chest, until they had made an end.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>Now it came to pass, that at what time the chest was brought unto the king’s office by the hand of the Levites, and when they saw that _there was_ much money, the king’s scribe and the high priest’s officer came and emptied the chest, and took it, and carried it to his place again. Thus they did day by day, and gathered money in abundance.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And the king and Jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of the service of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and hired masons and carpenters to repair the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and also such as wrought iron and brass to mend the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>So the workmen wrought, and the work was perfected by them, and they set the house of God in his state, and strengthened it.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And when they had finished _it_, they brought the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada, whereof were made vessels for the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, _even_ vessels to minister, and to offer _withal_, and spoons, and vessels of gold and silver. And they offered burnt offerings in the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> continually all the days of Jehoiada.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>¶ But Jehoiada waxed old, and was full of days when he died; an hundred and thirty years old _was he_ when he died.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And they buried him in the city of David among the kings, because he had done good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his house.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>Now after the death of Jehoiada came the princes of Judah, and made obeisance to the king. Then the king hearkened unto them.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>And they left the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of their fathers, and served groves and idols: and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their trespass.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>Yet he sent prophets to them, to bring them again unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>; and they testified against them: but they would not give ear.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>And the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest, which stood above the people, and said unto them, Thus saith God, Why transgress ye the commandments of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, that ye cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, he hath also forsaken you.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones at the commandment of the king in the court of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>Thus Joash the king remembered not the kindness which Jehoiada his father had done to him, but slew his son. And when he died, he said, The <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> look upon _it_, and require _it_.  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>¶ And it came to pass at the end of the year, _that_ the host of Syria came up against him: and they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the princes of the people from among the people, and sent all the spoil of them unto the king of Damascus.  
<span class="verse-number">24&ensp;</span>For the army of the Syrians came with a small company of men, and the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> delivered a very great host into their hand, because they had forsaken the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of their fathers. So they executed judgment against Joash.  
<span class="verse-number">25&ensp;</span>And when they were departed from him, (for they left him in great diseases,) his own servants conspired against him for the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the priest, and slew him on his bed, and he died: and they buried him in the city of David, but they buried him not in the sepulchres of the kings.  
<span class="verse-number">26&ensp;</span>And these are they that conspired against him; Zabad the son of Shimeath an Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith a Moabitess.  
<span class="verse-number">27&ensp;</span>¶ Now _concerning_ his sons, and the greatness of the burdens _laid_ upon him, and the repairing of the house of God, behold, they _are_ written in the story of the book of the kings. And Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.  

## CHAPTER 25.

Amaziah _was_ twenty and five years old _when_ he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name _was_ Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And he did _that which was_ right in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, but not with a perfect heart.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>¶ Now it came to pass, when the kingdom was established to him, that he slew his servants that had killed the king his father.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>But he slew not their children, but _did_ as _it is_ written in the law in the book of Moses, where the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> commanded, saying, The fathers shall not die for the children, neither shall the children die for the fathers, but every man shall die for his own sin.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>¶ Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together, and made them captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, according to the houses of _their_ fathers, throughout all Judah and Benjamin: and he numbered them from twenty years old and above, and found them three hundred thousand choice _men, able_ to go forth to war, that could handle spear and shield.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>He hired also an hundred thousand mighty men of valour out of Israel for an hundred talents of silver.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>But there came a man of God to him, saying, O king, let not the army of Israel go with thee; for the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> _is_ not with Israel, _to wit, with_ all the children of Ephraim.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>But if thou wilt go, do _it_, be strong for the battle: God shall make thee fall before the enemy: for God hath power to help, and to cast down.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>And Amaziah said to the man of God, But what shall we do for the hundred talents which I have given to the army of Israel? And the man of God answered, The <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> is able to give thee much more than this.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>Then Amaziah separated them, _to wit_, the army that was come to him out of Ephraim, to go home again: wherefore their anger was greatly kindled against Judah, and they returned home in great anger.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>¶ And Amaziah strengthened himself, and led forth his people, and went to the valley of salt, and smote of the children of Seir ten thousand.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And _other_ ten thousand _left_ alive did the children of Judah carry away captive, and brought them unto the top of the rock, and cast them down from the top of the rock, that they all were broken in pieces.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>¶ But the soldiers of the army which Amaziah sent back, that they should not go with him to battle, fell upon the cities of Judah, from Samaria even unto Beth–horon, and smote three thousand of them, and took much spoil.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>¶ Now it came to pass, after that Amaziah was come from the slaughter of the Edomites, that he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and set them up _to be_ his gods, and bowed down himself before them, and burned incense unto them.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>Wherefore the anger of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> was kindled against Amaziah, and he sent unto him a prophet, which said unto him, Why hast thou sought after the gods of the people, which could not deliver their own people out of thine hand?  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And it came to pass, as he talked with him, that _the king_ said unto him, Art thou made of the king’s counsel? forbear; why shouldest thou be smitten? Then the prophet forbare, and said, I know that God hath determined to destroy thee, because thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened unto my counsel.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>¶ Then Amaziah king of Judah took advice, and sent to Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us see one another in the face.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>And Joash king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thistle that _was_ in Lebanon sent to the cedar that _was_ in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed by a wild beast that _was_ in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>Thou sayest, Lo, thou hast smitten the Edomites; and thine heart lifteth thee up to boast: abide now at home; why shouldest thou meddle to _thine_ hurt, that thou shouldest fall, _even_ thou, and Judah with thee?  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>But Amaziah would not hear; for it _came_ of God, that he might deliver them into the hand _of their enemies_, because they sought after the gods of Edom.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>So Joash the king of Israel went up; and they saw one another in the face, _both_ he and Amaziah king of Judah, at Beth–shemesh, which _belongeth_ to Judah.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>And Judah was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled every man to his tent.  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>And Joash the king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, at Beth–shemesh, and brought him to Jerusalem, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits.  
<span class="verse-number">24&ensp;</span>And _he took_ all the gold and the silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of God with Obed–edom, and the treasures of the king’s house, the hostages also, and returned to Samaria.  
<span class="verse-number">25&ensp;</span>¶ And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.  
<span class="verse-number">26&ensp;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, first and last, behold, _are_ they not written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel?  
<span class="verse-number">27&ensp;</span>¶ Now after the time that Amaziah did turn away from following the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem; and he fled to Lachish: but they sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there.  
<span class="verse-number">28&ensp;</span>And they brought him upon horses, and buried him with his fathers in the city of Judah.  

## CHAPTER 26.

Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who _was_ sixteen years old, and made him king in the room of his father Amaziah.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>He built Eloth, and restored it to Judah, after that the king slept with his fathers.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>Sixteen years old _was_ Uzziah when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also _was_ Jecoliah of Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And he did _that which was_ right in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, according to all that his father Amaziah did.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And he sought God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in the visions of God: and as long as he sought the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, God made him to prosper.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And he went forth and warred against the Philistines, and brake down the wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod, and built cities about Ashdod, and among the Philistines.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians that dwelt in Gur–baal, and the Mehunims.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>And the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziah: and his name spread abroad _even_ to the entering in of Egypt; for he strengthened _himself_ exceedingly.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>Moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate, and at the valley gate, and at the turning _of the wall_, and fortified them.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>Also he built towers in the desert, and digged many wells: for he had much cattle, both in the low country, and in the plains: husbandmen _also_, and vine dressers in the mountains, and in Carmel: for he loved husbandry.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>Moreover Uzziah had an host of fighting men, that went out to war by bands, according to the number of their account by the hand of Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the ruler, under the hand of Hananiah, _one_ of the king’s captains.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>The whole number of the chief of the fathers of the mighty men of valour _were_ two thousand and six hundred.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And under their hand _was_ an army, three hundred thousand and seven thousand and five hundred, that made war with mighty power, to help the king against the enemy.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And Uzziah prepared for them throughout all the host shields, and spears, and helmets, and habergeons, and bows, and slings _to cast_ stones.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And he made in Jerusalem engines, invented by cunning men, to be on the towers and upon the bulwarks, to shoot arrows and great stones withal. And his name spread far abroad; for he was marvellously helped, till he was strong.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>¶ But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to _his_ destruction: for he transgressed against the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> his God, and went into the temple of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> to burn incense upon the altar of incense.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore priests of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, _that were_ valiant men:  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>And they withstood Uzziah the king, and said unto him, _It appertaineth_ not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, but to the priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense: go out of the sanctuary; for thou hast trespassed; neither _shall it be_ for thine honour from the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>Then Uzziah was wroth, and _had_ a censer in his hand to burn incense: and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, from beside the incense altar.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>And Azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon him, and, behold, he _was_ leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> had smitten him.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>And Uzziah the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, _being_ a leper; for he was cut off from the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>: and Jotham his son _was_ over the king’s house, judging the people of the land.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>¶ Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, did Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, write.  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>So Uzziah slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in the field of the burial which _belonged_ to the kings; for they said, He _is_ a leper: and Jotham his son reigned in his stead.  

## CHAPTER 27.

Jotham _was_ twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also _was_ Jerushah, the daughter of Zadok.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And he did _that which was_ right in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, according to all that his father Uzziah did: howbeit he entered not into the temple of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>. And the people did yet corruptly.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>He built the high gate of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and on the wall of Ophel he built much.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>Moreover he built cities in the mountains of Judah, and in the forests he built castles and towers.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>¶ He fought also with the king of the Ammonites, and prevailed against them. And the children of Ammon gave him the same year an hundred talents of silver, and ten thousand measures of wheat, and ten thousand of barley. So much did the children of Ammon pay unto him, both the second year, and the third.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>So Jotham became mighty, because he prepared his ways before the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> his God.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>¶ Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all his wars, and his ways, lo, they _are_ written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>¶ And Jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David: and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.  

## CHAPTER 28.

Ahaz _was_ twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem: but he did not _that which was_ right in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, like David his father:  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>For he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and made also molten images for Baalim.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>Moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and burnt his children in the fire, after the abominations of the heathen whom the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> had cast out before the children of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>He sacrificed also and burnt incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>Wherefore the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> his God delivered him into the hand of the king of Syria; and they smote him, and carried away a great multitude of them captives, and brought _them_ to Damascus. And he was also delivered into the hand of the king of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>¶ For Pekah the son of Remaliah slew in Judah an hundred and twenty thousand in one day, _which were_ all valiant men; because they had forsaken the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of their fathers.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, slew Maaseiah the king’s son, and Azrikam the governor of the house, and Elkanah _that was_ next to the king.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>And the children of Israel carried away captive of their brethren two hundred thousand, women, sons, and daughters, and took also away much spoil from them, and brought the spoil to Samaria.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>But a prophet of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> was there, whose name _was_ Oded: and he went out before the host that came to Samaria, and said unto them, Behold, because the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of your fathers was wroth with Judah, he hath delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage _that_ reacheth up unto heaven.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And now ye purpose to keep under the children of Judah and Jerusalem for bondmen and bondwomen unto you: _but are there_ not with you, even with you, sins against the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> your God?  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>Now hear me therefore, and deliver the captives again, which ye have taken captive of your brethren: for the fierce wrath of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> _is_ upon you.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>Then certain of the heads of the children of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against them that came from the war,  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And said unto them, Ye shall not bring in the captives hither: for whereas we have offended against the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> _already_, ye intend to add _more_ to our sins and to our trespass: for our trespass is great, and _there is_ fierce wrath against Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>So the armed men left the captives and the spoil before the princes and all the congregation.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And the men which were expressed by name rose up, and took the captives, and with the spoil clothed all that were naked among them, and arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink, and anointed them, and carried all the feeble of them upon asses, and brought them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to their brethren: then they returned to Samaria.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>¶ At that time did king Ahaz send unto the kings of Assyria to help him.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>For again the Edomites had come and smitten Judah, and carried away captives.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the low country, and of the south of Judah, and had taken Beth–shemesh, and Ajalon, and Gederoth, and Shocho with the villages thereof, and Timnah with the villages thereof, Gimzo also and the villages thereof: and they dwelt there.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>For the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel; for he made Judah naked, and transgressed sore against the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>And Tilgath–pilneser king of Assyria came unto him, and distressed him, but strengthened him not.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>For Ahaz took away a portion _out_ of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and _out_ of the house of the king, and of the princes, and gave _it_ unto the king of Assyria: but he helped him not.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>¶ And in the time of his distress did he trespass yet more against the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>: this _is that_ king Ahaz.  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>For he sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus, which smote him: and he said, Because the gods of the kings of Syria help them, _therefore_ will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me. But they were the ruin of him, and of all Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">24&ensp;</span>And Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God, and cut in pieces the vessels of the house of God, and shut up the doors of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and he made him altars in every corner of Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">25&ensp;</span>And in every several city of Judah he made high places to burn incense unto other gods, and provoked to anger the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of his fathers.  
<span class="verse-number">26&ensp;</span>¶ Now the rest of his acts and of all his ways, first and last, behold, they _are_ written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">27&ensp;</span>And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city, _even_ in Jerusalem: but they brought him not into the sepulchres of the kings of Israel: and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.  

## CHAPTER 29.

Hezekiah began to reign _when he was_ five and twenty years old, and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name _was_ Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And he did _that which was_ right in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, according to all that David his father had done.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>¶ He in the first year of his reign, in the first month, opened the doors of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and repaired them.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And he brought in the priests and the Levites, and gathered them together into the east street,  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And said unto them, Hear me, ye Levites, sanctify now yourselves, and sanctify the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy _place_.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>For our fathers have trespassed, and done _that which was_ evil in the eyes of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> our God, and have forsaken him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and turned _their_ backs.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>Also they have shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the lamps, and have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings in the holy _place_ unto the God of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>Wherefore the wrath of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> was upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he hath delivered them to trouble, to astonishment, and to hissing, as ye see with your eyes.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>For, lo, our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives _are_ in captivity for this.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>Now _it is_ in mine heart to make a covenant with the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel, that his fierce wrath may turn away from us.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>My sons, be not now negligent: for the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> hath chosen you to stand before him, to serve him, and that ye should minister unto him, and burn incense.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>¶ Then the Levites arose, Mahath the son of Amasai, and Joel the son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites: and of the sons of Merari, Kish the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of Jehalelel: and of the Gershonites; Joah the son of Zimmah, and Eden the son of Joah:  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And of the sons of Elizaphan; Shimri, and Jeiel: and of the sons of Asaph; Zechariah, and Mattaniah:  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And of the sons of Heman; Jehiel, and Shimei: and of the sons of Jeduthun; Shemaiah, and Uzziel.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And they gathered their brethren, and sanctified themselves, and came, according to the commandment of the king, by the words of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, to cleanse the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And the priests went into the inner part of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, to cleanse _it_, and brought out all the uncleanness that they found in the temple of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> into the court of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>. And the Levites took _it_, to carry _it_ out abroad into the brook Kidron.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>Now they began on the first _day_ of the first month to sanctify, and on the eighth day of the month came they to the porch of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>: so they sanctified the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> in eight days; and in the sixteenth day of the first month they made an end.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>Then they went in to Hezekiah the king, and said, We have cleansed all the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and the altar of burnt offering, with all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread table, with all the vessels thereof.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>Moreover all the vessels, which king Ahaz in his reign did cast away in his transgression, have we prepared and sanctified, and, behold, they _are_ before the altar of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>¶ Then Hezekiah the king rose early, and gathered the rulers of the city, and went up to the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>And they brought seven bullocks, and seven rams, and seven lambs, and seven he goats, for a sin offering for the kingdom, and for the sanctuary, and for Judah. And he commanded the priests the sons of Aaron to offer _them_ on the altar of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>So they killed the bullocks, and the priests received the blood, and sprinkled _it_ on the altar: likewise, when they had killed the rams, they sprinkled the blood upon the altar: they killed also the lambs, and they sprinkled the blood upon the altar.  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>And they brought forth the he goats _for_ the sin offering before the king and the congregation; and they laid their hands upon them:  
<span class="verse-number">24&ensp;</span>And the priests killed them, and they made reconciliation with their blood upon the altar, to make an atonement for all Israel: for the king commanded _that_ the burnt offering and the sin offering _should be made_ for all Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">25&ensp;</span>And he set the Levites in the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> with cymbals, with psalteries, and with harps, according to the commandment of David, and of Gad the king’s seer, and Nathan the prophet: for _so was_ the commandment of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> by his prophets.  
<span class="verse-number">26&ensp;</span>And the Levites stood with the instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets.  
<span class="verse-number">27&ensp;</span>And Hezekiah commanded to offer the burnt offering upon the altar. And when the burnt offering began, the song of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> began _also_ with the trumpets, and with the instruments _ordained_ by David king of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">28&ensp;</span>And all the congregation worshipped, and the singers sang, and the trumpeters sounded: _and_ all _this continued_ until the burnt offering was finished.  
<span class="verse-number">29&ensp;</span>And when they had made an end of offering, the king and all that were present with him bowed themselves, and worshipped.  
<span class="verse-number">30&ensp;</span>Moreover Hezekiah the king and the princes commanded the Levites to sing praise unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> with the words of David, and of Asaph the seer. And they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their heads and worshipped.  
<span class="verse-number">31&ensp;</span>Then Hezekiah answered and said, Now ye have consecrated yourselves unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, come near and bring sacrifices and thank offerings into the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>. And the congregation brought in sacrifices and thank offerings; and as many as were of a free heart burnt offerings.  
<span class="verse-number">32&ensp;</span>And the number of the burnt offerings, which the congregation brought, was threescore and ten bullocks, an hundred rams, _and_ two hundred lambs: all these _were_ for a burnt offering to the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">33&ensp;</span>And the consecrated things _were_ six hundred oxen and three thousand sheep.  
<span class="verse-number">34&ensp;</span>But the priests were too few, so that they could not flay all the burnt offerings: wherefore their brethren the Levites did help them, till the work was ended, and until the _other_ priests had sanctified themselves: for the Levites _were_ more upright in heart to sanctify themselves than the priests.  
<span class="verse-number">35&ensp;</span>And also the burnt offerings _were_ in abundance, with the fat of the peace offerings, and the drink offerings for _every_ burnt offering. So the service of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> was set in order.  
<span class="verse-number">36&ensp;</span>And Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, that God had prepared the people: for the thing was _done_ suddenly.  

## CHAPTER 30.

And Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> at Jerusalem, to keep the passover unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>For the king had taken counsel, and his princes, and all the congregation in Jerusalem, to keep the passover in the second month.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>For they could not keep it at that time, because the priests had not sanctified themselves sufficiently, neither had the people gathered themselves together to Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And the thing pleased the king and all the congregation.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>So they established a decree to make proclamation throughout all Israel, from Beer–sheba even to Dan, that they should come to keep the passover unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel at Jerusalem: for they had not done _it_ of a long _time in such sort_ as it was written.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>So the posts went with the letters from the king and his princes throughout all Israel and Judah, and according to the commandment of the king, saying, Ye children of Israel, turn again unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, and he will return to the remnant of you, that are escaped out of the hand of the kings of Assyria.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And be not ye like your fathers, and like your brethren, which trespassed against the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of their fathers, _who_ therefore gave them up to desolation, as ye see.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>Now be ye not stiffnecked, as your fathers _were, but_ yield yourselves unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and enter into his sanctuary, which he hath sanctified for ever: and serve the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> your God, that the fierceness of his wrath may turn away from you.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>For if ye turn again unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, your brethren and your children _shall find_ compassion before them that lead them captive, so that they shall come again into this land: for the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> your God _is_ gracious and merciful, and will not turn away _his_ face from you, if ye return unto him.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>So the posts passed from city to city through the country of Ephraim and Manasseh even unto Zebulun: but they laughed them to scorn, and mocked them.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>Nevertheless divers of Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>Also in Judah the hand of God was to give them one heart to do the commandment of the king and of the princes, by the word of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>¶ And there assembled at Jerusalem much people to keep the feast of unleavened bread in the second month, a very great congregation.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And they arose and took away the altars that _were_ in Jerusalem, and all the altars for incense took they away, and cast _them_ into the brook Kidron.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>Then they killed the passover on the fourteenth _day_ of the second month: and the priests and the Levites were ashamed, and sanctified themselves, and brought in the burnt offerings into the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And they stood in their place after their manner, according to the law of Moses the man of God: the priests sprinkled the blood, _which they received_ of the hand of the Levites.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>For _there were_ many in the congregation that were not sanctified: therefore the Levites had the charge of the killing of the passovers for every one _that was_ not clean, to sanctify _them_ unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>For a multitude of the people, _even_ many of Ephraim, and Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet did they eat the passover otherwise than it was written. But Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, The good <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> pardon every one  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>_That_ prepareth his heart to seek God, the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of his fathers, though _he be_ not _cleansed_ according to the purification of the sanctuary.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>And the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>¶ And the children of Israel that were present at Jerusalem kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness: and the Levites and the priests praised the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> day by day, _singing_ with loud instruments unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>And Hezekiah spake comfortably unto all the Levites that taught the good knowledge of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>: and they did eat throughout the feast seven days, offering peace offerings, and making confession to the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of their fathers.  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>And the whole assembly took counsel to keep other seven days: and they kept _other_ seven days with gladness.  
<span class="verse-number">24&ensp;</span>For Hezekiah king of Judah did give to the congregation a thousand bullocks and seven thousand sheep; and the princes gave to the congregation a thousand bullocks and ten thousand sheep: and a great number of priests sanctified themselves.  
<span class="verse-number">25&ensp;</span>And all the congregation of Judah, with the priests and the Levites, and all the congregation that came out of Israel, and the strangers that came out of the land of Israel, and that dwelt in Judah, rejoiced.  
<span class="verse-number">26&ensp;</span>So there was great joy in Jerusalem: for since the time of Solomon the son of David king of Israel _there was_ not the like in Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">27&ensp;</span>¶ Then the priests the Levites arose and blessed the people: and their voice was heard, and their prayer came _up_ to his holy dwelling place, _even_ unto heaven.  

## CHAPTER 31.

Now when all this was finished, all Israel that were present went out to the cities of Judah, and brake the images in pieces, and cut down the groves, and threw down the high places and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and Manasseh, until they had utterly destroyed them all. Then all the children of Israel returned, every man to his possession, into their own cities.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>¶ And Hezekiah appointed the courses of the priests and the Levites after their courses, every man according to his service, the priests and Levites for burnt offerings and for peace offerings, to minister, and to give thanks, and to praise in the gates of the tents of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>_He appointed_ also the king’s portion of his substance for the burnt offerings, _to wit_, for the morning and evening burnt offerings, and the burnt offerings for the sabbaths, and for the new moons, and for the set feasts, as _it is_ written in the law of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>Moreover he commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give the portion of the priests and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the law of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>¶ And as soon as the commandment came abroad, the children of Israel brought in abundance the firstfruits of corn, wine, and oil, and honey, and of all the increase of the field; and the tithe of all _things_ brought they in abundantly.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And _concerning_ the children of Israel and Judah, that dwelt in the cities of Judah, they also brought in the tithe of oxen and sheep, and the tithe of holy things which were consecrated unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> their God, and laid _them_ by heaps.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>In the third month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps, and finished _them_ in the seventh month.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>And when Hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they blessed the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and his people Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>Then Hezekiah questioned with the priests and the Levites concerning the heaps.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And Azariah the chief priest of the house of Zadok answered him, and said, Since _the people_ began to bring the offerings into the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, we have had enough to eat, and have left plenty: for the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> hath blessed his people; and that which is left _is_ this great store.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>¶ Then Hezekiah commanded to prepare chambers in the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>; and they prepared _them_,  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And brought in the offerings and the tithes and the dedicated _things_ faithfully: over which Cononiah the Levite _was_ ruler, and Shimei his brother _was_ the next.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath, and Asahel, and Jerimoth, and Jozabad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, _were_ overseers under the hand of Cononiah and Shimei his brother, at the commandment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah the ruler of the house of God.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, the porter toward the east, _was_ over the freewill offerings of God, to distribute the oblations of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and the most holy things.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And next him _were_ Eden, and Miniamin, and Jeshua, and Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, in _their_ set office, to give to their brethren by courses, as well to the great as to the small:  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>Beside their genealogy of males, from three years old and upward, _even_ unto every one that entereth into the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, his daily portion for their service in their charges according to their courses;  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>Both to the genealogy of the priests by the house of their fathers, and the Levites from twenty years old and upward, in their charges by their courses;  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>And to the genealogy of all their little ones, their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, through all the congregation: for in their set office they sanctified themselves in holiness:  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>Also of the sons of Aaron the priests, _which were_ in the fields of the suburbs of their cities, in every several city, the men that were expressed by name, to give portions to all the males among the priests, and to all that were reckoned by genealogies among the Levites.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>¶ And thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah, and wrought _that which was_ good and right and truth before the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> his God.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>And in every work that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the law, and in the commandments, to seek his God, he did _it_ with all his heart, and prospered.  

## CHAPTER 32.

After these things, and the establishment thereof, Sennacherib king of Assyria came, and entered into Judah, and encamped against the fenced cities, and thought to win them for himself.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib was come, and that he was purposed to fight against Jerusalem,  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>He took counsel with his princes and his mighty men to stop the waters of the fountains which _were_ without the city: and they did help him.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>So there was gathered much people together, who stopped all the fountains, and the brook that ran through the midst of the land, saying, Why should the kings of Assyria come, and find much water?  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>Also he strengthened himself, and built up all the wall that was broken, and raised _it_ up to the towers, and another wall without, and repaired Millo _in_ the city of David, and made darts and shields in abundance.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And he set captains of war over the people, and gathered them together to him in the street of the gate of the city, and spake comfortably to them, saying,  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the king of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that _is_ with him: for _there be_ more with us than with him:  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>With him _is_ an arm of flesh; but with us _is_ the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> our God to help us, and to fight our battles. And the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah king of Judah.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>¶ After this did Sennacherib king of Assyria send his servants to Jerusalem, (but he _himself laid siege_ against Lachish, and all his power with him,) unto Hezekiah king of Judah, and unto all Judah that _were_ at Jerusalem, saying,  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>Thus saith Sennacherib king of Assyria, Whereon do ye trust, that ye abide in the siege in Jerusalem?  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>Doth not Hezekiah persuade you to give over yourselves to die by famine and by thirst, saying, The <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> our God shall deliver us out of the hand of the king of Assyria?  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>Hath not the same Hezekiah taken away his high places and his altars, and commanded Judah and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall worship before one altar, and burn incense upon it?  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>Know ye not what I and my fathers have done unto all the people of _other_ lands? were the gods of the nations of those lands any ways able to deliver their lands out of mine hand?  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>Who _was there_ among all the gods of those nations that my fathers utterly destroyed, that could deliver his people out of mine hand, that your God should be able to deliver you out of mine hand?  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>Now therefore let not Hezekiah deceive you, nor persuade you on this manner, neither yet believe him: for no god of any nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people out of mine hand, and out of the hand of my fathers: how much less shall your God deliver you out of mine hand?  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And his servants spake yet _more_ against the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God, and against his servant Hezekiah.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>He wrote also letters to rail on the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel, and to speak against him, saying, As the gods of the nations of _other_ lands have not delivered their people out of mine hand, so shall not the God of Hezekiah deliver his people out of mine hand.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>Then they cried with a loud voice in the Jews’ speech unto the people of Jerusalem that _were_ on the wall, to affright them, and to trouble them; that they might take the city.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>And they spake against the God of Jerusalem, as against the gods of the people of the earth, _which were_ the work of the hands of man.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>And for this _cause_ Hezekiah the king, and the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz, prayed and cried to heaven.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>¶ And the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> sent an angel, which cut off all the mighty men of valour, and the leaders and captains in the camp of the king of Assyria. So he returned with shame of face to his own land. And when he was come into the house of his god, they that came forth of his own bowels slew him there with the sword.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>Thus the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Sennacherib the king of Assyria, and from the hand of all _other_, and guided them on every side.  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>And many brought gifts unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> to Jerusalem, and presents to Hezekiah king of Judah: so that he was magnified in the sight of all nations from thenceforth.  
<span class="verse-number">24&ensp;</span>¶ In those days Hezekiah was sick to the death, and prayed unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>: and he spake unto him, and he gave him a sign.  
<span class="verse-number">25&ensp;</span>But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit _done_ unto him; for his heart was lifted up: therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">26&ensp;</span>Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, _both_ he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> came not upon them in the days of Hezekiah.  
<span class="verse-number">27&ensp;</span>¶ And Hezekiah had exceeding much riches and honour: and he made himself treasuries for silver, and for gold, and for precious stones, and for spices, and for shields, and for all manner of pleasant jewels;  
<span class="verse-number">28&ensp;</span>Storehouses also for the increase of corn, and wine, and oil; and stalls for all manner of beasts, and cotes for flocks.  
<span class="verse-number">29&ensp;</span>Moreover he provided him cities, and possessions of flocks and herds in abundance: for God had given him substance very much.  
<span class="verse-number">30&ensp;</span>This same Hezekiah also stopped the upper watercourse of Gihon, and brought it straight down to the west side of the city of David. And Hezekiah prospered in all his works.  
<span class="verse-number">31&ensp;</span>¶ Howbeit in _the business of_ the ambassadors of the princes of Babylon, who sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was _done_ in the land, God left him, to try him, that he might know all _that was_ in his heart.  
<span class="verse-number">32&ensp;</span>¶ Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and his goodness, behold, they _are_ written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, _and_ in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">33&ensp;</span>And Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the chiefest of the sepulchres of the sons of David: and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honour at his death. And Manasseh his son reigned in his stead.  

## CHAPTER 33.

Manasseh _was_ twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and five years in Jerusalem:  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>But did _that which was_ evil in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, like unto the abominations of the heathen, whom the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> had cast out before the children of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>¶ For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had broken down, and he reared up altars for Baalim, and made groves, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>Also he built altars in the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, whereof the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> had said, In Jerusalem shall my name be for ever.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And he caused his children to pass through the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom: also he observed times, and used enchantments, and used witchcraft, and dealt with a familiar spirit, and with wizards: he wrought much evil in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, to provoke him to anger.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And he set a carved image, the idol which he had made, in the house of God, of which God had said to David and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen before all the tribes of Israel, will I put my name for ever:  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>Neither will I any more remove the foot of Israel from out of the land which I have appointed for your fathers; so that they will take heed to do all that I have commanded them, according to the whole law and the statutes and the ordinances by the hand of Moses.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>So Manasseh made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, _and_ to do worse than the heathen, whom the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> had destroyed before the children of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> spake to Manasseh, and to his people: but they would not hearken.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>¶ Wherefore the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> brought upon them the captains of the host of the king of Assyria, which took Manasseh among the thorns, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And when he was in affliction, he besought the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers,  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And prayed unto him: and he was intreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> he _was_ God.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>Now after this he built a wall without the city of David, on the west side of Gihon, in the valley, even to the entering in at the fish gate, and compassed about Ophel, and raised it up a very great height, and put captains of war in all the fenced cities of Judah.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And he took away the strange gods, and the idol out of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and all the altars that he had built in the mount of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and in Jerusalem, and cast _them_ out of the city.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And he repaired the altar of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and sacrificed thereon peace offerings and thank offerings, and commanded Judah to serve the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>Nevertheless the people did sacrifice still in the high places, _yet_ unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> their God only.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>¶ Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and his prayer unto his God, and the words of the seers that spake to him in the name of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel, behold, they _are written_ in the book of the kings of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>His prayer also, and _how God_ was intreated of him, and all his sin, and his trespass, and the places wherein he built high places, and set up groves and graven images, before he was humbled: behold, they _are_ written among the sayings of the seers.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>¶ So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his own house: and Amon his son reigned in his stead.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>¶ Amon _was_ two and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned two years in Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>But he did _that which was_ evil in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, as did Manasseh his father: for Amon sacrificed unto all the carved images which Manasseh his father had made, and served them;  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>And humbled not himself before the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, as Manasseh his father had humbled himself; but Amon trespassed more and more.  
<span class="verse-number">24&ensp;</span>And his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own house.  
<span class="verse-number">25&ensp;</span>¶ But the people of the land slew all them that had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his stead.  

## CHAPTER 34.

Josiah _was_ eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem one and thirty years.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And he did _that which was_ right in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and walked in the ways of David his father, and declined _neither_ to the right hand, nor to the left.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>¶ For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his father: and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And they brake down the altars of Baalim in his presence; and the images, that _were_ on high above them, he cut down; and the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images, he brake in pieces, and made dust _of them_, and strowed _it_ upon the graves of them that had sacrificed unto them.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And he burnt the bones of the priests upon their altars, and cleansed Judah and Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>And _so did he_ in the cities of Manasseh, and Ephraim, and Simeon, even unto Naphtali, with their mattocks round about.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And when he had broken down the altars and the groves, and had beaten the graven images into powder, and cut down all the idols throughout all the land of Israel, he returned to Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>¶ Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the land, and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah the governor of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder, to repair the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> his God.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>And when they came to Hilkiah the high priest, they delivered the money that was brought into the house of God, which the Levites that kept the doors had gathered of the hand of Manasseh and Ephraim, and of all the remnant of Israel, and of all Judah and Benjamin; and they returned to Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And they put _it_ in the hand of the workmen that had the oversight of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and they gave it to the workmen that wrought in the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, to repair and amend the house:  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>Even to the artificers and builders gave they _it_, to buy hewn stone, and timber for couplings, and to floor the houses which the kings of Judah had destroyed.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And the men did the work faithfully: and the overseers of them _were_ Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of Merari; and Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites, to set _it_ forward; and _other of_ the Levites, all that could skill of instruments of musick.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>Also _they were_ over the bearers of burdens, and _were_ overseers of all that wrought the work in any manner of service: and of the Levites _there were_ scribes, and officers, and porters.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>¶ And when they brought out the money that was brought into the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, Hilkiah the priest found a book of the law of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> _given_ by Moses.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>. And Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>And Shaphan carried the book to the king, and brought the king word back again, saying, All that was committed to thy servants, they do _it_.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>And they have gathered together the money that was found in the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and have delivered it into the hand of the overseers, and to the hand of the workmen.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>Then Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest hath given me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the law, that he rent his clothes.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>And the king commanded Hilkiah, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Abdon the son of Micah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah a servant of the king’s, saying,  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>Go, enquire of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> for me, and for them that are left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the words of the book that is found: for great _is_ the wrath of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> that is poured out upon us, because our fathers have not kept the word of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, to do after all that is written in this book.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>And Hilkiah, and _they_ that the king _had appointed_, went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvath, the son of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the college:) and they spake to her to that _effect_.  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>¶ And she answered them, Thus saith the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel, Tell ye the man that sent you to me,  
<span class="verse-number">24&ensp;</span>Thus saith the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, _even_ all the curses that are written in the book which they have read before the king of Judah:  
<span class="verse-number">25&ensp;</span>Because they have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands; therefore my wrath shall be poured out upon this place, and shall not be quenched.  
<span class="verse-number">26&ensp;</span>And as for the king of Judah, who sent you to enquire of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, so shall ye say unto him, Thus saith the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel _concerning_ the words which thou hast heard;  
<span class="verse-number">27&ensp;</span>Because thine heart was tender, and thou didst humble thyself before God, when thou heardest his words against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, and humbledst thyself before me, and didst rend thy clothes, and weep before me; I have even heard _thee_ also, saith the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">28&ensp;</span>Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of the same. So they brought the king word again.  
<span class="verse-number">29&ensp;</span>¶ Then the king sent and gathered together all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">30&ensp;</span>And the king went up into the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and all the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the priests, and the Levites, and all the people, great and small: and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant that was found in the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">31&ensp;</span>And the king stood in his place, and made a covenant before the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, to walk after the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and to keep his commandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with all his heart, and with all his soul, to perform the words of the covenant which are written in this book.  
<span class="verse-number">32&ensp;</span>And he caused all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand _to it_. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the covenant of God, the God of their fathers.  
<span class="verse-number">33&ensp;</span>And Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the countries that _pertained_ to the children of Israel, and made all that were present in Israel to serve, _even_ to serve the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> their God. _And_ all his days they departed not from following the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, the God of their fathers.  

## CHAPTER 35.

Moreover Josiah kept a passover unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> in Jerusalem: and they killed the passover on the fourteenth _day_ of the first month.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>And he set the priests in their charges, and encouraged them to the service of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>,  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And said unto the Levites that taught all Israel, which were holy unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, Put the holy ark in the house which Solomon the son of David king of Israel did build; _it shall_ not _be_ a burden upon _your_ shoulders: serve now the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> your God, and his people Israel,  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And prepare _yourselves_ by the houses of your fathers, after your courses, according to the writing of David king of Israel, and according to the writing of Solomon his son.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>And stand in the holy _place_ according to the divisions of the families of the fathers of your brethren the people, and _after_ the division of the families of the Levites.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>So kill the passover, and sanctify yourselves, and prepare your brethren, that _they_ may do according to the word of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> by the hand of Moses.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>And Josiah gave to the people, of the flock, lambs and kids, all for the passover offerings, for all that were present, to the number of thirty thousand, and three thousand bullocks: these _were_ of the king’s substance.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>And his princes gave willingly unto the people, to the priests, and to the Levites: Hilkiah and Zechariah and Jehiel, rulers of the house of God, gave unto the priests for the passover offerings two thousand and six hundred _small cattle_, and three hundred oxen.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethaneel, his brethren, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, chief of the Levites, gave unto the Levites for passover offerings five thousand _small cattle_, and five hundred oxen.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>So the service was prepared, and the priests stood in their place, and the Levites in their courses, according to the king’s commandment.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>And they killed the passover, and the priests sprinkled _the blood_ from their hands, and the Levites flayed _them_.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And they removed the burnt offerings, that they might give according to the divisions of the families of the people, to offer unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, as _it is_ written in the book of Moses. And so _did they_ with the oxen.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And they roasted the passover with fire according to the ordinance: but the _other_ holy _offerings_ sod they in pots, and in caldrons, and in pans, and divided _them_ speedily among all the people.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>And afterward they made ready for themselves, and for the priests: because the priests the sons of Aaron _were busied_ in offering of burnt offerings and the fat until night; therefore the Levites prepared for themselves, and for the priests the sons of Aaron.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And the singers the sons of Asaph _were_ in their place, according to the commandment of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun the king’s seer; and the porters _waited_ at every gate; they might not depart from their service; for their brethren the Levites prepared for them.  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>So all the service of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> was prepared the same day, to keep the passover, and to offer burnt offerings upon the altar of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, according to the commandment of king Josiah.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>And the children of Israel that were present kept the passover at that time, and the feast of unleavened bread seven days.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>And there was no passover like to that kept in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet; neither did all the kings of Israel keep such a passover as Josiah kept, and the priests, and the Levites, and all Judah and Israel that were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah was this passover kept.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>¶ After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Necho king of Egypt came up to fight against Carchemish by Euphrates: and Josiah went out against him.  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>But he sent ambassadors to him, saying, What have I to do with thee, thou king of Judah? _I come_ not against thee this day, but against the house wherewith I have war: for God commanded me to make haste: forbear thee from _meddling with_ God, who _is_ with me, that he destroy thee not.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his face from him, but disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and hearkened not unto the words of Necho from the mouth of God, and came to fight in the valley of Megiddo.  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>And the archers shot at king Josiah; and the king said to his servants, Have me away; for I am sore wounded.  
<span class="verse-number">24&ensp;</span>His servants therefore took him out of that chariot, and put him in the second chariot that he had; and they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died, and was buried in _one of_ the sepulchres of his fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.  
<span class="verse-number">25&ensp;</span>¶ And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah: and all the singing men and the singing women spake of Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and made them an ordinance in Israel: and, behold, they _are_ written in the lamentations.  
<span class="verse-number">26&ensp;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his goodness, according to _that which was_ written in the law of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>,  
<span class="verse-number">27&ensp;</span>And his deeds, first and last, behold, they _are_ written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.  

## CHAPTER 36.

Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and made him king in his father’s stead in Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">2&ensp;</span>Jehoahaz _was_ twenty and three years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">3&ensp;</span>And the king of Egypt put him down at Jerusalem, and condemned the land in an hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.  
<span class="verse-number">4&ensp;</span>And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem, and turned his name to Jehoiakim. And Necho took Jehoahaz his brother, and carried him to Egypt.  
<span class="verse-number">5&ensp;</span>¶ Jehoiakim _was_ twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and he did _that which was_ evil in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> his God.  
<span class="verse-number">6&ensp;</span>Against him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and bound him in fetters, to carry him to Babylon.  
<span class="verse-number">7&ensp;</span>Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the vessels of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> to Babylon, and put them in his temple at Babylon.  
<span class="verse-number">8&ensp;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and his abominations which he did, and that which was found in him, behold, they _are_ written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah: and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.  
<span class="verse-number">9&ensp;</span>¶ Jehoiachin _was_ eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem: and he did _that which was_ evil in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">10&ensp;</span>And when the year was expired, king Nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought him to Babylon, with the goodly vessels of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">11&ensp;</span>¶ Zedekiah _was_ one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned eleven years in Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">12&ensp;</span>And he did _that which was_ evil in the sight of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> his God, _and_ humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet _speaking_ from the mouth of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>.  
<span class="verse-number">13&ensp;</span>And he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God: but he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning unto the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of Israel.  
<span class="verse-number">14&ensp;</span>¶ Moreover all the chief of the priests, and the people, transgressed very much after all the abominations of the heathen; and polluted the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> which he had hallowed in Jerusalem.  
<span class="verse-number">15&ensp;</span>And the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimes, and sending; because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place:  
<span class="verse-number">16&ensp;</span>But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> arose against his people, till _there was_ no remedy.  
<span class="verse-number">17&ensp;</span>Therefore he brought upon them the king of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that stooped for age: he gave _them_ all into his hand.  
<span class="verse-number">18&ensp;</span>And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the treasures of the house of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span>, and the treasures of the king, and of his princes; all _these_ he brought to Babylon.  
<span class="verse-number">19&ensp;</span>And they burnt the house of God, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof.  
<span class="verse-number">20&ensp;</span>And them that had escaped from the sword carried he away to Babylon; where they were servants to him and his sons until the reign of the kingdom of Persia:  
<span class="verse-number">21&ensp;</span>To fulfil the word of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths: _for_ as long as she lay desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfil threescore and ten years.  
<span class="verse-number">22&ensp;</span>¶ Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> _spoken_ by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and _put it_ also in writing, saying,  
<span class="verse-number">23&ensp;</span>Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, All the kingdoms of the earth hath the <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> God of heaven given me; and he hath charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem, which _is_ in Judah. Who _is there_ among you of all his people? The <span class="small-caps">Lord</span> his God _be_ with him, and let him go up.  
